Aristotle's politics is not an easy book
to read and does not a book that I
recommend others read lightly modern
readers even readers with real
sophistication in philosophy real
sophistication and politics and a fairly
robust background in ancient Greek
writing modern readers will very often
completely miss the point of the text
and for large crucial portions of text
in the book such as the chapter I guess
I'm going to be discussing here today I
am just discussing one portion of the
argument as an example but it's much
more than just an isolated example
because the themes dealt with in this
section of text we're talking about here
slavery inequality relations between men
and women husband and wife political
inequality and how you constitute a
republic these are very fundamentally
tied into the knot of issues that
Aristotle is addressing throughout the
text as a whole so it's a crucially
important passage in itself and it's
also just one example of why it is that
Aristotle is so hard for people to read
and appreciate today even when so many
talented translators have worked on this
text backwards and forwards for
generations and generations to render it
into English German French almost every
modern European language there are ways
in which we deceive ourselves it's very
easy to approach a text like this with
an unexamined assumption of symmetry of
intent what do you think these are my
intentions as a reader these are my
interests therefore I expect the author
from the other the other side to meet to
meet my expectations to mirror my intent
so might my perspective
in the 21st century maybe oh I'm looking
for a really serious profound sober
clear exposition of the most important
ideas from political philosophy in each
piece and that's what I'm expecting this
book to provide me with so if I don't
find that I may be disappointed or I may
just be perplexed what if what I
actually find is a book with a lot of
sarcasm what if I find is a book with a
lot of dense humor inside jokes and
intentional use of paradox paradox in
the classical sense of confounding the
reader of saying to the reader the exact
opposite of what they're expecting
presenting the reader with impossible
contradictory claims apparently just to
befuddle or dazzle the reader Aristotle
was not producing a dry sober text
you're gonna see that in this example
we're discussing okay he was not writing
something to last a thousand years and
thinking how how you perceive it I'm
sure your cultural perspective in the
distant future okay
he was very much writing for the
audience of his time he was writing for
small groups of gentlemen who would sit
around and read this out loud and laugh
at the jokes there's a lot of humor and
there were a lot of cultural references
here that are just barely comprehensible
today because we were lucky enough that
the scraps of text being alluded to
survive history in some cases they
didn't survive okay so um I'll give the
citation in the description to where
this the the descriptive text below this
video that this whole passage starts
around 1259 in the manuscript pagination
there's a system of keeping track of
pages that's universal to although all
the serious editions okay so um we have
the passage of text here about the
relationship between husband and wife
and we're told repeatedly in a somewhat
confusing
way that the inequality between husband
and wife is very much like the
inequality in a republic in a polity
it's very much like the type of
inequality written into the Constitution
of the type of mixed Democratic and
aristocratic society that Aristotle is
describing for us throughout the work as
well so we already know he's talking
about marriage he's talking about
slavery in exactly the same part of the
text he's talking about this type of
inequality but he's not even talking
about it as an allegory for inequality
in society so he's very much talking
about it as an example of as tied to
intimately and profoundly the type of
inequality in society
so we're told repeatedly that there's a
relationship between husband and wife
that's very much like the relationship
between a politician and the public in
this society there's some inequality
between husband and wife but he's not
saying this is a simple biological in
quote he is not saying men are born
superior and women are bore through know
what what does he actually say the
inequality between man and wife I'm
paraphrasing here reminds us of the
saying of a Massif about his foot pan
period in your translation it may say
the emperor amasses of egypt it may say
foot bath instead of foot bath you can
be reading for several pages in a row
here in English and in a sense the
better the translation the English is
the more baffling and incomprehensible
this will be to you because the more the
translator is smoothed it over the less
you'll realize that the author is being
intentionally paradoxical and
provocative we're lucky we get the joke
because the joke being made here the
saying of a masses of Egypt is preserved
in Herodotus
and it's in part of the text that
parotid us that survived thousands of
years of history some parts of the text
did not so if if those chapters of
Herodotus had perished and the flames
had been lost history
we wouldn't know for a fact that we do
know that this is a very provocative
frankly snarky joke that he's making
what is aristotle really saying but the
inequality between man and wife and at
the same time the inequality between
political leaders and the members of the
public they lead the story about a
masses that he completely presumes his
audience the type of refined gentleman
engaged in political life in Athens who
would read this in the time the audience
he's read his work they're gonna stop
and laugh out loud at this series of
very provocative statements being made
here about husband and wife and the
relation between the house owner and its
slaves and a politician in the public oh
yes the Emperor a Mascis of Egypt a man
who was reviled by his subjects because
he called himself a king but he was born
and raised a commoner just as they just
as they themselves were so what did he
do as the story goes as the legend goes
if there's any historical truth to this
I doubt it but whatever the story goes
that there was a golden foot bath or
foot pan as this true there was a
something that everyone who came to
visit everyone in the court knew well
they all washed their feet in so I guess
this was a foot bath at the entrance to
the world chambers or something of that
sort
and the text in ta'rhonda says that he
broke it up into pieces and he assembled
the pieces into an image of a God and
then he said to them he said to thee I
said to the assembled multitude who
followed him he said all of you now
worship that God that used to be a
footbath in the same way you should
recognize that I now on the king
I now emperor of Egypt even though I
used to be a commoner this is a bizarre
and provocative image but if you think
for one minute that Aristotle truly
believes that chunks of gold torn apart
from a footbath genuinely constitute a
God that ought to be worshipped you're
crazy okay that cannot be the purpose of
this passage of text it cannot be that
Aristotle is saying to you deadpan
serious with no humor in the same way
that the people of Egypt worshiped this
footbath as a god in the same way wives
should respect their husbands as their
superiors
that is ridiculous it's intentionally
ridiculous he's being paradoxical
provocative snarky sarcastic he's
writing with a sense of humor and it's a
very strange sense of humor that's very
difficult to appreciate today so what is
Aristotle saying positively about the
relation of husband and wife here I
would say it's not an over
interpretation to suggest that he's
pointing to the extent to which the
inequality between husband and wife is a
social convention in our modern terms
and it is even a laughable social
convention in the same way that this
emperor in Egypt presenting a footbath
as a god is a laughable social
convention and yet because people
believe in it it's powerful because
people believe in the leadership of the
king he is therefore a king and not a
commoner a difference that is not
biological it's not magical it's not the
bowl of the gods it's just social
convention and it's even a laughable
social convention okay in the same way
the inequalities he's talking about here
husband to wife mastered a slave
political leader the people being led
were being given of their
direct indication here that the real
purpose of this text is not what it
would seem at first glance at first
reading okay now when you know that and
to give another brief warning here
throughout this whole text Aristotle is
absolutely hating on Plato there's a lot
of really really negative snarky remarks
about place just a couple a couple pages
later um to really take apart the extent
to which he's joking when he says to
speak in general terms and to maintain
the goodness consists in a good
condition of the soul or in right action
or of anything of the kind is to be
guilty of self-deception far better than
such general definitions is the method
of simple enumeration of the different
forms of goodness as followed by
gorgeous
okay so gorgeous is gorgeous with with a
G this is a this is a famous dialogue of
Plato now this whole passage this whole
passage fellow it's just sort of next
page over from what I've just quoted you
this bizarre joke about the emperor of
Egypt and it's and it's golden foot bath
being made into a God okay there's a lot
of sarcasm and snarky remarks if paradox
him seeing the exact opposite of what he
really means it is impossible for me to
imagine that in this context and when
there's so much said against Plato
through the whole text Plato is the butt
of every joke Plato is insulted and
denigrated constantly - there it is
impossible for me to imagine that his
point here is deadpan serious to
indicate that Plato what Plato is saying
is right in the gorgeous it's much more
likely to be the opposite or it's some
more complex the joke that we have to
really unpack reading the paragraph
before and after and say okay what is he
really alluding to here in gordias and
what is he really saying in making this
intentionally of a fuss Kotori statement
about ethics alright he's
capable of being clear when he wants to
be clear and he's capable of being
mysterious when he wants to be
mysterious this is an intentionally
provocative paradoxical statement and
the idea was that people at that time
they knew were lucky we have this text
so if Plato's dialogue the gorgias had
disappeared in lost history we'd never
be able to know what he's really talking
about okay but in this case the text
does exist we can look it up and we can
try to puzzle out what is he really
saying here and again this is part of
the same argument he's talking about the
inequality between men and women the
inequality between owners and slaves
okay the very next sentence after this
bizarre allusion to Plato which again I
assume is somewhat sarcastic and
insulting towards Plato because we have
a statement that absolutely must be a
joke okay now most people and I think
even most translators if they're working
fast they miss this joke and I'll
mention briefly when I was a very young
man I read the tragedy of Ajax so the
tragedy of Ajax is an ancient play
written by Sophocles that's quoted here
by Aristotle so I think I read it for
the first time probably when I was still
a teenager and then later in life I went
back and read it again and again it was
really meaningful to me during a certain
phase of my life assumed it so I knew
the tragedy of Ajax quite well so there
is a quote here that's less than a full
sentence long from Sophocles in the
tragedy of Ajax and I've spoken to many
many people including one of my
ex-girlfriends was a very memorable
dialogue one of my ex-girlfriends quoted
this passage of Aristotle to me as proof
that Aristotle was a misogynist that he
had a tremendous a negative view of
women so he follows up this snarky
remark about Plato by saying quote we
must therefore hold what the poet
Sophocles said of women quote a modest
silence is a woman's
crowd closed whoo the very first time I
read this passage in Aristotle I laughed
the translator here doesn't get the joke
if you can look at peer-reviewed
research there are peer-reviewed
articles that some of the scholars get
the joke some don't if you know the
context he's quoting this is hilarious
because the actual situation is that
Ajax
is receiving advice from a woman that
would have saved his life the situation
and the tragedy that's unfolding here is
he's saying no no no he refuses to
listen to this woman and what she's
saying to him is 100% true and profound
and good his faith and he's saying he's
basically telling this woman to just
shut up while he proceeds to destroy
himself and it leads it leads to his
death
so the slightly psychologically complex
scenario it's not worth unpacking here
Aristotle isn't just making a joke here
this reveals that his intent as an offer
as an author in this whole paragraph
he's 180 degrees the opposite what a dry
humorless reading of the passage would
suggest to us you might well presume
just reading this in English straight
that he means to suggest to you in a
humorless way that women ought to be
silent he means the opposite he's saying
very directly to his audience of the
time he wasn't writing for people
thousands of years later he was writing
for the type of learning gentleman in
Athenian society who probably would have
seen this drama by Socrates by Sophocles
performed live again and again
year after year they didn't have that
many that many new plays so they've
probably seen it before many times
they'd hear the line and know it and
know this is the story of a man who's
destroyed a man who dies because he
ignores good advice from a woman that
it's outrageously funny for him to
suggest in this context that the the
relationship to women and men are so
loved so that women do have good advice
that men should listen to women and if
men ignore women's advice at least their
destruction okay
now I know how easy it would be for
people to regard what I'm doing in this
video as some kind of politically
correct excuse making for as though I
know how easy it is for people to hear
something like this and think oh here's
this guy with a beard in the 21st
century who's just trying to reinterpret
Aristotle to make Aristotle less
misogynist than he is to make Aristotle
seem like he cares more about the slaves
that he really does or something no no
no no no the ultimate purpose of the
Oddie
are the argument I'm presenting to you
here apart from just being a warning
about how hard it is to read and
understand Arizona is the argument that
we must read ancient texts with a
complete sense of detachment about the
intention of the author the intention of
the author really matters and if you
come to a text like this just even with
the expectation um this is going to
define for me you know what made
Athenian democracy so great what made
democracy nation Athens so great why do
you assume that's his interest why do
you assume that's his objective that's
not Aristotle's objective I've made
other videos talking about the political
conditions he lived in he was in a very
difficult situation he wasn't from
Athens right he was from Macedonia he
had a direct connection to the political
authorities in Macedonia the Macedonian
Empire what was going on with Alexander
the Great with the wars there being
fought at that time his political agenda
his personal interests why he's writing
this particular book what his thesis is
they have nothing to do with your
expectations as a reader and you're
frustrated expectations they won't just
lead to you being disappointed with the
book they will lead to you being 180
degrees wrong about the meaning of the
book passage by passage and above the
book as a whole a veer
large percentage of this book is a
thesis on the meaning of equality and
how it is we can have in some sense a
politically equal society a society
built on political equality when that
society includes such radical
inequalities as the relationship to
imperative child husband and wife slave
owner enslave King and the general
population figure like Alexander the
Great at that time to some extent King
to some extent a military general but if
you want to say how is it that we
comprise a semi Democratic Society with
all those contributions and even though
I've only presented you with these
examples for this particular purpose
here I think you'll agree if you take
the time to read this text as a whole
you actually cannot understand the
thesis of the book without taking
seriously the challenge of just those
few passages that rely on such a close
reading of other ancient texts that are
alluded to in just half a second but
that half a second is the author winking
at you letting you know just how
sarcastic he really was just what a
strange provocative sense of humor he
brought to the task because his task
wasn't writing a book that would last
2,000 years and his task was writing a
book that would capture the attention
and interest of the audience that was
alive at that time